README.md, before:

# Simple Stable Diffusion UI

A simple local web UI for SD image generation using **FastAPI + Gradio**.

- Python **3.12+**
- Runs on Linux CPU, NVIDIA CUDA, and **AMD ROCm** (PyTorch ROCm)
- Loads *only* from local files in `models/`
- Saves outputs to `outputs/` and serves them at `/outputs/...`

## Folder layout

- `models/base/`   SDXL base model (Diffusers folder or `.safetensors`)
- `models/refiner/` (optional) SDXL refiner model
- `models/vae/`    (optional) VAE
- `models/lora/`   (optional) LoRA(s)
- `outputs/`       generated images

Create the missing folders you need (only `models/base` is required).

## Install

Create a venv and install dependencies:

```bash
python3.12 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -U pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### PyTorch for AMD ROCm (Linux)

Install a ROCm-enabled PyTorch build appropriate for your distro + ROCm version.

- Start here: <https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/>
- For ROCm wheels, PyTorch typically uses an index like `https://download.pytorch.org/whl/rocm*`

After installing ROCm PyTorch, `torch.cuda.is_available()` should return `True` (ROCm uses the `cuda` device string).

## Add your models

Put your model files under `models/`.

Examples:

- Diffusers SDXL base:
  - `models/base/stabilityai--stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0/` (contains `model_index.json`)
- Single-file SDXL:
  - `models/base/sdxl_base.safetensors`
- LoRA:
  - `models/lora/my_style.safetensors`
- VAE:
  - `models/vae/sdxl_vae.safetensors` (or a diffusers VAE folder)

## Run

```bash
python run.py
```

Then open:

- UI: <http://localhost:7860/>
- Health: <http://localhost:7860/api/health>

## Notes

- If you get out-of-memory errors, reduce resolution, steps, number of images, or use fewer LoRAs.

## Generation history (SQLite)

Each generation is saved to a local SQLite DB (default: `outputs/history.sqlite3`) including:

- Prompt + negative prompt
- Core settings (steps/CFG/scheduler/prediction type/etc.)
- Output filenames saved under `outputs/`

In the UI, open the **History** section to browse recent items and click **Load settings into form** to reuse prompts/settings.

## NoobAI-XL (v-pred models)

NoobAI-XL has both epsilon/noise-pred and **v-prediction** variants.

- For most epsilon/noise-pred models, defaults are fine.
- For **v-pred** models, set **Prediction type** to `v_prediction`.
- Recommended starting point: `Euler` or `Euler a`, CFG ~3–5, steps ~32–40.
- If you see oversaturation/overexposure, try **CFG rescale (guidance_rescale)** around `0.7` and keep `rescale_betas_zero_snr` enabled.

Commit message:

feat: support long prompts and optimize memory
- Implement CLIP token chunking for prompts over 77 tokens
- Add memory cleanup via GC and optional CUDA cache clearing
- Reduce UI RAM usage by rendering images from disk instead of memory
- Improve LoRA loading/unloading and add peft dependency
- Add environment variables for controlling long prompt and cleanup behavior

README.md, after:

# Simple Stable Diffusion UI

A simple local web UI for SD image generation using **FastAPI + Gradio**.

- Python **3.12+**
- Runs on Linux CPU, NVIDIA CUDA, and **AMD ROCm** (PyTorch ROCm)
- Loads *only* from local files in `models/`
- Saves outputs to `outputs/` and serves them at `/outputs/...`

## Folder layout

- `models/base/`   SDXL base model (Diffusers folder or `.safetensors`)
- `models/refiner/` (optional) SDXL refiner model
- `models/vae/`    (optional) VAE
- `models/lora/`   (optional) LoRA(s)
- `outputs/`       generated images

Create the missing folders you need (only `models/base` is required).

## Install

Create a venv and install dependencies:

```bash
python3.12 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -U pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Note: LoRA loading requires the `peft` package (included in `requirements.txt`).

### PyTorch for AMD ROCm (Linux)

Install a ROCm-enabled PyTorch build appropriate for your distro + ROCm version.

- Start here: <https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/>
- For ROCm wheels, PyTorch typically uses an index like `https://download.pytorch.org/whl/rocm*`

After installing ROCm PyTorch, `torch.cuda.is_available()` should return `True` (ROCm uses the `cuda` device string).

## Add your models

Put your model files under `models/`.

Examples:

- Diffusers SDXL base:
  - `models/base/stabilityai--stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0/` (contains `model_index.json`)
- Single-file SDXL:
  - `models/base/sdxl_base.safetensors`
- LoRA:
  - `models/lora/my_style.safetensors`
- VAE:
  - `models/vae/sdxl_vae.safetensors` (or a diffusers VAE folder)

## Run

```bash
python run.py
```

Then open:

- UI: <http://localhost:7860/>
- Health: <http://localhost:7860/api/health>

## Notes

- If you get out-of-memory errors, reduce resolution, steps, number of images, or use fewer LoRAs.
- CLIP text encoders have a hard prompt-length limit (commonly 77 tokens). This app defaults to **chunking** long prompts so you don't lose trailing tags. You can control behavior with:
  - `SDUI_LONG_PROMPT_MODE=chunk` (default)
  - `SDUI_LONG_PROMPT_MODE=truncate` (drop tokens past the limit)
  - `SDUI_LONG_PROMPT_MODE=error` (reject overly-long prompts)
- If RAM/VRAM usage keeps creeping up after many generations, this app now defaults to cleaning up between runs (Python GC, and optional CUDA cache cleanup). You can control this via env vars:
  - `SDUI_CLEANUP_AFTER_GENERATE=1` (default) / `0`
  - `SDUI_EMPTY_CUDA_CACHE=1` (default `0`) — can help with long-running sessions at the cost of performance
- The UI renders results from saved files in `outputs/` (instead of keeping PIL images in memory), which significantly reduces long-run RAM growth.

## Generation history (SQLite)

Each generation is saved to a local SQLite DB (default: `outputs/history.sqlite3`) including:

- Prompt + negative prompt
- Core settings (steps/CFG/scheduler/prediction type/etc.)
- Output filenames saved under `outputs/`

In the UI, open the **History** section to browse recent items and click **Load settings into form** to reuse prompts/settings.

## NoobAI-XL (v-pred models)

NoobAI-XL has both epsilon/noise-pred and **v-prediction** variants.

- For most epsilon/noise-pred models, defaults are fine.
- For **v-pred** models, set **Prediction type** to `v_prediction`.
- Recommended starting point: `Euler` or `Euler a`, CFG ~3–5, steps ~32–40.
- If you see oversaturation/overexposure, try **CFG rescale (guidance_rescale)** around `0.7` and keep `rescale_betas_zero_snr` enabled.
